the identity of a locomotive lies in
homes the one thing people take away
from the steam experience is that rich
melodious sound echoes for over 20 years
my family and I have been creating
custom whistles for the live steam and
amusement scale railroads all over the
world from 3/4 inch to 5 inch scale and
everything in between
while we were vacationing last year I
had the opportunity to visit the
Virginia and Truckee Railroad in Carson
City Nevada as we boarded the cab to
meet the engineer and fireman the
discussion of a new whistle came up they
were completely dissatisfied with the
sound of their current whistle and a
request was made to have a better selfie
West Coast flavored whistle after
returning to the Niles shops and
discussing the project with the rest of
the family it was decided that we would
build two full-sized steam whistles for
the V&T this would give them a chance to
pick the one that represented their
railroad the best and give us a chance
to build two full-sized whistles
something that we had never done before
about six months later Thomas Gray the
owner of the railroad dropped off the
original whistle to us at the end of
their operating season this would allow
us to take measurements and made up a
new bell to the existing base
eliminating the need to machine a
completely new one from scratch once I
found the sounds I was looking for from
video clips on youtube I asked mark
Morello an accomplished musician and
educator who also happens to be my wife
Heather's brother-in-law to determine
what notes each of the whistles were
sounding once I had the notes I applied
some math to determine the chamber
lengths of each of the five chambers my
father then set to work cutting all of
the pieces of steel that would make up
the inside of the whistle once all the
pieces were machined and interlocked so
they couldn't move during welding it was
off to my brother's shop in the Sierra
Foothills Steve welded the interior
vanes with
MIG welder and the bell to the veins
with traditional stick welding after all
the welding was complete the whistles
were tested on air to make sure they
both performed as predicted and the
video was sent to the V&T for approval
we returned to the nile shops and
finished the machining on the two
whistles the outsides were turned
sandblasted and painted black and the
insides were painted red the caps were
sent out to be engraved with our name
and packing boxes were built on Saturday
June 8 2013 at 7:45 a.m. the first
whistle was installed on the MacLeod
river number 18 all the planning
machining and overwhelming stress would
be resolved with the first pole would it
work as designed would it over blow with
the railroad be happy with the sound
these were all questions going through
my mind as I pulled the cord for the
very first time
it was a success and I could breathe a
little easier all the work and stress
was forgotten about with the sound of
that first pull over the next two days
each of the whistles had an opportunity
to run on the train from Virginia City
to Carson City a round trip of about 30
miles or more
after all was said and done whistle
number 30 a standard Nathan Sound was
chosen to be the new voice from the
cloud River 18 we could never thank the
crew or the owner of the Virginia and
Truckee Railroad enough for the
opportunity and experience they provided
to us
we made some great friends had a
wonderful time and we now count them as
part of our closest railroad family so
the next time you're in Carson City stop
by the Virginia and Truckee Railroad and
take a ride on one of the best short
lines in the world